---
title: Introduction to LLPL
author: sdohrmann
layout: post
identifier: LLPL
---

There are several ways to program with persistent memory from Java. A
[recent pmem.io blog article](https://pmem.io/2020/03/04/pmemkv-bindings.html)
described the pmemkv library, a persistent key-value store, which can be used
from multiple languages. For Java, pmemkv supports three ubiquitous
Java types: String, byte[], and ByteBuffer.

Another PMDK component, the Low-Level Persistence Library (LLPL) is an
open source Java library [(https://github.com/pmem/llpl)](https://github.com/pmem/llpl) that 
gives Java developers access to persistent memory in a very fast and flexible way.
This article will introduce LLPL by way of Java examples that show how
to manage and access persistent memory using the library.

LLPL offers persistent memory as heaps of memory, separate from the Java
heap and the Java objects that reside there. While LLPL heaps are
separate from the (non-persistent) Java heap, you use regular Java
objects to access persistent memory. You can create LLPL heaps, reopen
them, and delete them. You can create many heaps, of almost any size, as
long as there is unused persistent memory available to create them.

In Figure 1 below, we see Java Heap and MemoryBlock objects being used
to access LLPL heaps and memory blocks. At any point in time, these Java
access objects are needed only for those heaps and memory blocks that
are actively being accessed. When an access object becomes unreachable
and is collected by Java, nothing happens to the persistent memory;
memory management of LLPL memory blocks is done manually. Likewise,
while the Java heap and all its objects disappear when the Java
application exits, the LLPL heaps, blocks, and relationships between
blocks remain. We'll see later, in code, that it's easy to re-access
LLPL heaps and their memory blocks when your Java application restarts.

![Figure 1 -- objects on the Java heap used to access persistent memory in
LLPL heaps](/assets/llpl_intro_figure_1.png)


Now we'll walk through some code examples that demonstrate creating
heaps, and reading and writing to blocks of persistent memory.

To create a heap:
```java
   long heapSize = 100 * 1024 * 1024;
   Heap heap = Heap.createHeap("/pmem/heap1", heapSize);
```
This creates a 100 MB heap with the name "heap1". The "/pmem/" portion of
the heap path is an example of a base path where persistent memory was
provisioned on the system. To re-access a heap after a process or
machine restart:

```java
   Heap heap = Heap.openHeap("/pmem/heap1");
```

You can delete this heap by deleting the file that names the heap:
```
   >rm /pmem/heap1
```
Once you have a heap, the next step is to allocate some part of it for
writing and reading:

```java
   MemoryBlock block1 = heap.allocateMemoryBlock(1024, false);
```
This returns a memory block object representing a 1K block of zero'd
bytes. The memory block API has setter and getter methods for Java byte,
short, int, and long types, as well as bulk memory copy methods. For
example, to set a long value of 1234 at the first byte in the memory
block:

```java
   block1.setLong(0, 1234);
   block1.flush(0, Long.BYTES); // flush data to persistent memory modules
```

Note the flush call in the second line above. Persistent memory behaves
much like regular DRAM, and programming with it is very similar. The
obvious difference is its persistence, and the flush above is a necessary 
operation associated with persistence.

Like DRAM, persistent memory is "cache-coherent virtual memory" and
writes to pmem are placed in the CPU cache and made visible to other
threads. Like DRAM, however, flushing writes from the CPU cache to the
actual memory modules may be delayed until the system needs the cache
space. This means that your persistent memory program will behave
correctly when initially run, but some of your writes to pmem may not
have been pushed all the way to the persistent memory modules prior to
your program's exit. In that case, some changes won't be present when
you reopen the heap to access the "persistent" data. To ensure your
changes make it all the way to the memory modules and are available
after a restart, a flush operation needs to be done, sometime before
your program exits, on those parts of persistent memory that were
modified.

We'll see later how LLPL can flush writes automatically, but full manual
control of flushing is available as shown above.

Byte positions within a block are specified using zero-based offsets
from the beginning of the block. You can copy bytes between memory
blocks, or between a memory block and a Java byte array. For example, to
write a length-prefixed string "Saturn" to the first byte in the memory
block:

```java
   String s = "Saturn";
   block1.setInt(0, s.length());
   block1.copyFromArray(s.getBytes(), 0, 4, s.length());
   block1.flush(0, Integer.BYTES + s.length()); // flush both writes
```

After a process exits, the Java objects representing the heap and
allocated blocks are discarded, but the persistent memory remains. A way
to re-access the memory we were using in the last session is needed, and
there are methods in the Heap API that let us do that easily.

To save a "bookmark" to a memory block before our process exits, we can
store the name for a memory block, its "handle", represented as a Java
long value, in a special named "root" location in the heap.
```java
   heap.setRoot(block1.handle());
```
To access our heap and our block after a restart:

```java
   Heap heap = Heap.openHeap("/pmem/heap1");
   MemoryBlock block1 = heap.memoryBlockFromHandle(heap.getRoot());
```

The second line above wraps a memory block object around the supplied
handle, giving access again to memory associated with the handle. Memory
block handles are stable, and can be safely written as long values into
other memory blocks, in order to link blocks and build reference-based
data structures:

```java
   MemoryBlock block2 = heap.allocateMemoryBlock(1024, false);
   block1.setLong(100, block2.handle());
   block1.flush(100, Long.BYTES); // flush 8 bytes, handles are Java longs
```

When you read a handle from one block and want to access the memory
associated with the handle you read, you pass the handle to the heap's
memoryBlockFromHandle method to get a memory block back:

```java
   long block2Handle = block1.getLong(100);
   MemoryBlock block2 = heap.memoryBlockFromHandle(block2Handle);
```

Deallocating a block of memory is done manually by calling its free()
method:

```java
   block2.free(false);
```

Since we freed block2, its handle is no longer valid, so we will set the
block2 handle we wrote into block1 to zero, an invalid handle value:

```java
   block1.setLong(100, 0);
   block1.flush(100, Long.BYTES);
```

In the examples so far, we have been writing data and flushing the
writes to persistent memory media. Under normal circumstances, this is
all that is required to ensure that your data is intact and usable when
you restart your application and reopen the heap. However, unforeseen
events (e.g. crashes or power failures) can complicate this simple data
integrity scheme. For example, if a memory copy operation happens to get
interrupted by a crash, only part of the data will have been written to
persistent memory, leaving the heap in an inconsistent state. Or, if you
are modifying a linked data structure (e.g. writing data to two
distinct locations in order to insert a node into a linked list) an
interruption can leave your data structure in an un-linked state.

For cases where the consistency of the heap must be maintained in the
face of such events, LLPL offers transactional operations and user
transactions to provide fail-safe writing to a heap.

The example below writes a length-prefixed string in a fail-safe way, by
enclosing the writes in a Transaction and specifying which bytes are
modified as part of the transaction.

```java
   String s = "Saturn";
   Transaction.create(heap, () -> {
      block1.addToTransaction(0, Integer.BYTES + s.length());
      block1.setInt(0, s.length());
      block1.copyFromArray(s.getBytes(), 0, 4, s.length());
   });
```

Note the addToTransaction call above. This tells the transaction about a
range of bytes that will be modified as part of the transaction --
*before* they are modified. This allows the transaction implementation
to make a backup of those bytes, to be used in restoring the original
data in the event that the transaction is interrupted. Written this way,
the modifications done as part of the transaction will behave as if they
"happen as a whole or not at all." Flushing of the modifications is done
automatically by the transaction if the Java lambda expression (the
body of the transaction) executes to completion.

If the application allows multiple threads to concurrently access a byte
range being modified in a transaction, then in order to maintain correct
transactional behavior, it is important to isolate access to that byte
range for the duration of the transaction. For example:

```java
   String s = "Saturn";
   synchronized(block1) {
      Transaction.create(heap, () -> {
         block1.addToTransaction(0, Integer.BYTES + s.length());
         block1.setInt(0, s.length());
         block1.copyFromArray(s.getBytes(), 0, 4, s.length());
      });
   }
```

In the examples so far, we have been using general Heap and MemoryBlock
classes. The MemoryBlock API gives manual control over flushing and
adding transaction byte ranges; this gives maximum flexibility, but
requires extra coding and care to not forget these important operations.
With some loss of flexibility, and possibly some loss of performance,
LLPL offers two additional kinds of heaps and corresponding memory
blocks that can be used to automate flushing and adding ranges to a
transaction.

The PersistentHeap and corresponding PersistentMemoryBlock classes are
very similar to the general Heap and MemoryBlock classes, but they
automate flushing of writes:

```java
   PersistentHeap heap = PersistentHeap.createHeap("/pmem/heap2", heapSize);
   PersistentMemoryBlock block3 = heap.allocateMemoryBlock(1024, false);
   String s = "Saturn";
   block3.setInt(0, s.length());
   block3.copyFromArray(s.getBytes(), 0, 4, s.length());
   // both writes are flushed automatically
```

In a similar way, if you want all writes on a heap to be transactional,
the TransactionalHeap and corresponding TransactionalMemoryBlock classes
automate the adding of all writes to a transaction, both stand-alone
writes and writes within an explicit transaction body:

```java
   TransactionalHeap heap = TransactionalHeap.createHeap("/pmem/heap3", heapSize);
   TransactionalMemoryBlock block4 = heap.allocateMemoryBlock(1024);
   String s = "Saturn";
   Transaction.create(heap, () -> {
      // write ranges will automatically be added to the transaction
      block4.setInt(0, s.length());
      block4.copyFromArray(s.getBytes(), 0, 4, s.length());
   });
```

Offset-based specification of memory locations, as used in the examples
above, is very flexible but can be tedious and error-prone. Various
techniques can be used to abstract block offsets and hide offset
arithmetic. One such technique is to create a Java class whose named
accessor methods statically refer to specific offsets within a memory
block. For example:

```java
   public class Employee {
      private static long ID = 0;
      private static long NAME_LENGTH = 8;
      private static long NAME_BYTES = 12;
      private TransactionalMemoryBlock block;
      
      public Employee(TransactionalHeap heap, long id, String name) {
         Transaction.create(heap, () -> {
            block = heap.allocateMemoryBlock(8 + 4 + name.length());
            setId(id);
            setName(name);
         });
      }
      
      // "reconstruct" an Employee from handle
      public Employee(TransactionalHeap heap, long handle) {
         this.block = heap.memoryBlockFromHandle(handle);
      }
      
      public long getId() {
         return block.getLong(ID);
      }

      public void setId(long id) {
         block.setLong(ID, id);
      }

      public String getName() {
         int nameLength = block.getInt(NAME_LENGTH);
         byte[] bytes = new byte[nameLength];
         block.copyToArray(NAME_BYTES, bytes, 0, nameLength);
         return new String(bytes);
      }

      public void setName(String name) {
         byte[] bytes = name.getBytes();
         int nameLength = bytes.length;
         block.setInt(NAME_LENGTH, nameLength);
         block.copyFromArray(bytes, 0, NAME_BYTES, nameLength);
      }

      public void free() {
         block.free();
      }

      public long handle() {
         return block.handle();
      }
   }
```

Using a wrapper object in this way abstracts the allocation, and reading
and writing of persistent data into familiar constructor calls and
method calls:

```java
   Employee e = new Employee(heap, 12345, "Jupiter");
   long id = e.getId();
   e.setId(23456);
   String name = e.getName();
   e.setName("Pluto");
   e.free();
```

Note that management of the persistent memory these wrapper objects
refer to is still manual. There are more complete code samples in the
examples directory in the LLPL GitHub repository at
[https://github.com/pmem/llpl](https://github.com/pmem/llpl)

I hope that you found this introduction to LLPL interesting, and that
you explore LLPL further on GitHub.
