---
title: C++ bindings for libpmemobj (part 0)
author: pbalcer
layout: post
identifier: cpp_00
---

Our goal for the C pmemobj library was to make a fully featured implementation
of persistent memory programming model without modifying the compiler. It's
meant for authors of very low-level system software and language creators.
It's not particularly pretty nor easy to use. The amount of macros, as well as
the trickery inside them, might 'amaze' even the biggest preprocessor fans ;)

The natural next step is to leverage the high-level languages features to
create a more friendly, less error prone and generally nicer API.

This tutorial series will introduce you to libpmemobj  C++ bindings that leverage
meta-programming capabilities of that language. The bindings are implemented as
header-only library and can be found in the `src/include/libpmemobj` directory.
All classes/functions are in the `nvml::obj` namespace.

The overall goal of the libpmemobj for C++ is to focus modifications to volatile
programs on data structures and not on the code. In other words, we want you to
be able to modify your `structs` and `classes` with only slight modifications to
your functions.

The tutorial posts will introduce new C++ features one-by-one and as a consequence
of that, the first few tutorials will still use C API before the C++ equivalents
are introduced.

General knowledge of persistent memory programming model is recommended.
Please read the [libpmemobj tutorial]({% post_url 2015-06-12-pmem-model %})
if you haven't already.

Note: Currently only C++11 (and newer) version of the language is supported.
Older standard (minimum C++03) support is going to be added at a later date.

### C++ limitations

* References as members of persistent structures/classes are forbidden.
* Polymorphic persistent classes are forbidden.
* Be mindful about static member variables. Not using them is recommended.
