---
title: C++ bindings for libpmemobj (part 2) - persistent smart pointer
author: pbalcer
layout: post
---

In our C API the programmer has to deal with custom pointers represented by
the PMEMoid structure. Thanks to some macro magic we made it so that those PMEMoids
are somewhat usable. C++ allows us to evolve this concept.

### nvml::obj::persistent_ptr

Almost everyone who ever touched a C++ code knows the idea behind smart pointers
(for example, `std::shared_ptr`). Our persistent pointer works in the same way.
It wraps around a type and provides implementation of `operator*`, `operator->`
and `operator[]`.

A constructor from raw PMEMoid is provided, so that mixing the C API with C++ is
possible.

As always, we are going to start with an example:

{% highlight C linenos %}
#include <libpmemobj/p.hpp>
#include <libpmemobj/persistent_ptr.hpp>

using namespace nvml::obj;

struct rectangle {
	p<int> a;
	p<int> b;
};

struct root {
	persistent_ptr<rectangle> rect;
};

{% endhighlight %}

It's a modified rectangle example from transactional allocations tutorial.
Layout declaration using macros is no longer required :)

As I previously said, the persistent pointers can be constructed from PMEMoids,
and as such, we are going to allocate the rectangle by using the regular C API.

{% highlight C linenos %}

persistent_ptr<root> rootp = pmemobj_root(pop, sizeof (root));

TX_BEGIN(pop) {
	persistent_ptr<rectangle> rect = pmemobj_tx_alloc(sizeof (rectangle), 0);
	rect->x = 5;
	rect->y = 10;

	rootp->rect = rect; /* assignments are automatically added to TX */
} TX_END

{% endhighlight %}

As you can see, pretty easy. No more ugly D_RW or D_RO macros ! :)

There's one thing to highlight here: The rectangle constructor is NOT called in
this example. This is because we are using C allocation function.
This is equivalent to a following construct in a regular C++:

{% highlight C linenos %}
shared_ptr<rectangle> rect((rectangle *)malloc(sizeof (rectangle)));
{% endhighlight %}

To free a `persistent_ptr` using the C API, a special `raw()` function is available
that returns a const reference to the PMEMoid.

{% highlight C linenos %}

TX_BEGIN(pop) {
	pmemobj_tx_free(rootp->rect.raw());
	rootp->rect = nullptr;
} TX_END

{% endhighlight %}

Later tutorials will introduce proper allocator functions that do
call the constructor and destructors accordingly.

The `persistent_ptr` class also implements a `raw_ptr()` function which returns
a pointer to the PMEMoid - this enables usage of the C failsafe atomic API.

Right now the persistent_ptr class can only be used with non-polymorphic and
trivially default constructible classes. Those limitations *might* be relaxed
in later versions of the bindings.
